                                                                     School Sector Program (RRP NEP 35174)



                        ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK

A.      INTRODUCTION

        1.      Program Description

1.     The Government of Nepal (GON) is currently implementing School Sector Reform
Program (SSRP) based on the SSR plan core document which was developed as a common
document for all Development Partners (DPs) supporting education sector in Nepal. SSRP is a
harmonized program between the GON and nine development partners: the ADB, World Bank,
DfID, UNICEF, European Commission and the governments of Australia, Denmark, Finland,
and Norway. The proposed School Sector Program (SSP), covering the period of FY2013-2014,
will support the SSRP of GON which spans 7 years (FY2010 to FY2016). It was jointly
appraised by Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the other development partners (DPs) in
2009, covering a period of 5 years up to 2014. The proposed SSP is a follow-on program to
L2551-NEP: Education Sector Program III (ESP-III).1 The financing proposed under the
Program, will continue to support the rationale, outcomes, impact and output of the ESP-III
design and monitoring framework (DMF) which is aligned to GON‟s overarching SSRP vision
and framework.

2.      The SSP is composed of five outputs encompassing various subsectors and
crosscutting areas: (i) more equitable access to quality education, (ii) enhanced student
learning; (iii) safer schools; (iv) enhanced teacher management and development; and (v) better
management of governance risks in the education sector. To address disaster risks, the GON
has adopted a National Strategy and Disaster Risk Management (DRM). The Program will also
support retrofitting of schools in Kathmandu Valley to reduce seismic risks. Design and
construct of school infrastructure will be done considering impacts from extreme climate. Social
inclusion and quality improvement are key cross-cutting objectives in all the components.

3.      The Implementing Agency (Department of Education) will be responsible for preparing
environmental assessment and implementing Environmental Management Plan (EMP) as
outlined in this Environmental Management Framework (EMF)2 and submit to the concerned
development partner for review prior to commencement of works. The EMF intends to integrate
environmental assessment and management plan into the subproject preparation process. The
EMF confirms environmental safeguard policies of the development partners, including ADB,
and the requirements of the Government of Nepal.

4.      The SSP is categorized as environment Category B.

        2.      Physical Infrastructure Development in SSP

5.       One of the components of the SSP is physical infrastructure development of schools and
District Education Offices. Under the physical infrastructure component, the following activities
are envisioned:




1
  ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Asian Development
  Fund Grant and Loan for Subprogram III, Nepal: Education Sector Program. Manila.
2
  This EMF is equivalent to Environmental Assessment and Review Framework (EARF) as per Safeguard Policy
  Statement 2009 (SPS) of ADB
2


       (i)     Construction of District Education Office building (total 20 nos.)
       (ii)    Construction of school and hostel building for disables (total 100 nos.)
       (iii)   Construction of library and laboratory (total 300 nos.)
       (iv)    New classroom construction (total 19,500 nos.)
       (v)     External environmental improvement (construction of girls toilet, boys toilet, water
               supply)
       (vi)    Classroom rehabilitation (total 13,000 nos.)
       (vii)   Retrofitting of school buildings, which is a new pilot component for seismic risk
               management in old school building (total 160 nos.).

       3.      Environmental Management Framework

6.      The program components eligible for funding under the SSP will be required to satisfy
the safeguard policies of development partners including ADB and the World Bank, in addition
to conformity with relevant provisions of the Government of Nepal (GON). These policies will
also be considered to comply with environmental safeguard issue. Thus, a donor harmonized
EMF was prepared for SSP in May 2009. The EMF has been updated for the purpose of SSP,
and includes strengthened institutional mechanism for implementation and monitoring of
safeguards, and templates to prepare initial environmental examination report, environmental
due diligence report, monitoring checklist, and reporting format.

7.     This EMF provides general policies, guidelines, and procedures to be integrated into the
implementation of all infrastructures under the Program. In preparing this document, relevant
environmental safeguard practices, compliance, and past experience in the sector were
reviewed. The review also included central level consultations; qualitative and quantitative
assessments of environmental safeguard compliance processes in the DOE; capacity
assessment of the implementing agency; and information on the capacity of their field level staff.
The EMF also refers to the requirements of the National Environmental Guidelines for School
Improvement and Facility Management in Nepal, 2004.

8.      This EMF is intended to be used as a practical tool during school infrastructure planning,
design, implementation, and monitoring. The Framework describes the steps involved in
identifying and mitigating the potential adverse environmental impacts from infrastructure
implementation activities, and extreme climatic conditions. EMF ensures protection of health
and hygiene of students, environmental sustainability, and welfare of affected stakeholders. The
EMF also addresses disaster risk reduction.

9.     The EMF outlines environmental screening procedures, assessment methodologies,
environmental management (mitigation, monitoring and documentation), and reporting for the
components of the Program; and to specify institutional structure and mechanism to carryout
compliance to environmental management plan.

B.     ASSESSMENT OF LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY

       1.      Assessment of Legal Framework

               a.     Review of National Environmental Policies and Legislation of Nepal

10.   The national policies, acts and guidelines for safeguard requirements relevant to the
Program are as listed in following Table 1.
                                                                                                                       3


        Table 1: GON National Policies, Environmental Acts, Regulations and Guidelines
 SN          Environmental Acts,                                 Description of Requirements
         Regulations and Guidelines
1.      Three Years Approach Paper,      Requires adapting and minimizing negative impacts posed by climate change
        2010/11-2012/13, GON             by making human activity and development activities environment friendly
                                         through concept of green development. Also calls to develop institutional
                                         capacity of the mechanism of environment related policies and laws.
2.      Environmental Protection Act,    Any development project, before implementation, shall pass through
        1997, GON                        environmental assessment, which may be either IEE or an EIA depending
                                         upon the location, type and size of the projects. Provision for dealing with
                                         pollution control, and conservation of national heritage.
3.      Environmental Protection Rule    The EPR and its schedules clearly provide various step-wise requirements to
        1997 (amendment, 2007), GON      be followed while conducting the EIA/IEE study. It also obliges the Proponent
                                         to timely consult and inform the public on the contents of the proposal.
                                         Provision for dealing with pollution control, and conservation of national
                                         heritage is also present. Schedule 1 listed projects require IEE and Schedule
                                         2 listed projects require EIA study. The criteria are based on size of projects
                                         and cost. It also lists environmentally sensitive areas where any proposal
                                         regardless of size and cost will require an EIA.
4.      Forest Act, 1993 (amendment,     Requires decision makers to take account of all forest values, including
        2007), GON                       environmental services and biodiversity, not just the production of timber and
                                         other commodities. It includes several provisions to ensure development,
                                         conservation, management, and sustainable use of forest resources based
                                         on approved work plan.
5.      Forest Rules, 1995, GON          Elaborates legal measures for the conservation of forests and wildlife.
                                         Expenses incurred for cutting trees and transportation shall be borne by
                                         proponent.
6.      National Parks and Wildlife      Addresses for conservation of ecologically valuable areas and indigenous
        Conservation Act, 1973, GON      wildlife. The Act prohibits trespassing in park areas, prohibits wildlife hunting,
                                         construction works in park area, damage to plant and animal, construction of
                                         huts and house in park area without permission of authorized person. It lists
                                         26 species of mammals, nine species of birds, and three species of reptile as
                                         protected wildlife.
7.      Local Infrastructure             Empowers the local bodies for the conservation of soil, forest and other
        Development Policy (2005);       natural resources and implements environmental conservation activities. It
        Local Self Governance Act        commits to make local infrastructure sustainable by adopting labor based,
        (1999) and Regulation (2000),    environment friendly, and participatory work method. They ensure
        GON                              environmental assessment for developing local infrastructures.
8       Land Acquisition Act, 1977 and   Specifies procedural matters on land acquisition and compensation
        Land Acquisition Rules, 1969,
        GON
9.      National Environmental Impact    Provides guidance to project proponent on integrating environmental
        Assessment Guidelines, 1993,     mitigation measures, particularly on the management of quarries, borrow pits,
        GON                              stockpiling of materials and spoil disposal, operation of the work camps,
                                         earthworks and slope stabilization, location of stone crushing plants etc.
10.     National Environmental           Provides guidance to project proponent to ensure environmental safeguards
        Guidelines for School            in school facility development activities.
        Improvement and Facility
        Management in Nepal, 2004

                   b.       Safeguard Policy of Development Partners

11.      The safeguard requirements of development partners co-financing in the Program are as
listed in following Table 2.

                         Table 2: Safeguard Policies of Development Partners
S.No.    Development                                         Safeguard Policies
           Partners
1.      ADB                According to the Safeguard Policy Statement 2009 of ADB, the SSP falls under
4


S.No.    Development                                       Safeguard Policies
           Partners
                        Environment Category B (though unlikely to have any significant environmental impacts).
                        Nevertheless, if an IEE level assessment is not required, environmental implications shall
                        still be reviewed and mitigation measures suggested by preparing a due diligence report.
2.      International   EA policy OP 4.07 is triggered. According to this SSP has been categorized as
        Development     Environmental Category B Project. Thus in case of SSP, environmental impacts due to
        Association     program activities must be fully identified and appropriate mitigation measures clearly
        (IDA)           defined with cost.
3.      AusAID          The SSP falls under scenario 1 of environmental marker set by Aus AID, which states no
                        significant environmental impact. The monitoring of unexpected environmental impacts
                        should be incorporated into activity's monitoring & evaluation process.
4.      EU              The liability for environmental damage falls into three categories namely; protected
                        species & natural habitats, water and soil. The SSP activities won't trigger any negative
                        implications in above three categories.
5.      UNICEF          Helping schools provide supplies, safe water and sanitation. Water, sanitation and hygiene
                        are crucial to encouraging girls to go to and stay in school. Lack of clean and separate
                        sanitation facilities in schools discourages many girls from attending school full time and
                        forces some of them to drop out altogether. Children of both sexes are sapped of
                        nutrients, energy and the ability to learn if they are infected with water-borne parasites.
                        These issues have been addressed in this EMF.
6.      Finland         Emphasizes the importance of environmental considerations in all activities with a view to
                        forestalling threats, and creating conditions conducive to prosperity based on the
                        sustainable use of natural resources. It supports environmental programs and the
                        development of environmental administration.

12.     No significant environmental implications are envisaged by the implementation of SSP.
Proposed district education office (DEO) building and school building construction and
rehabilitation activities may incur minimal level of impacts. Rather beneficial impacts from
implementation of the Program significantly outweigh any adverse impacts.

                  c.     Safeguard Requirements of Government of Nepal

13.     Schedule 1 related to Rule 3 of the Environment Protection Rule (amendment 2007) of
GON requires Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for buildings with following size or
location:
        (i)    Construction of residential or commercial building and their combination with a
               built up area or floor area between 5,000 to 10,000 sq.m.;
        (ii)   Cinema hall, theater, community hall, stadium, concert hall, spot complex with a
               capacity of 1,000 to 2,000 people to pass at one time;
        (iii)  Development of residential area on 1 to 4 ha. size of land;
        (iv)   Land development program of 10 to 100 ha. size;
        (v)    Construction of hard surface pavement of size more than 10 ha. (for example dry
               port, bus park, parking lot etc.);
        (vi)   Development of site with cutting or filling of more than 20,000 cu.m. earth;
        (vii)  Construction of buildings above 10 stories or 25m height to 16 stories or 50m
               height;
        (viii) Construction work that may require clearing of more than 5 ha. forest area;
        (ix)   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is required for any infrastructure to be
               constructed in historical, cultural, and archeological sites; national park, wildlife
               reserve, wetlands, and conservation area; and main source of drinking water
               supply;
        (x)    Any construction work not listed in the schedule of EPR and that cost between
               Rs.50 million to Rs.250 million.
                                                                                                                   5


     14.    Preparation of Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) may not be required in SSP
     where proposed construction works under the program will be less than the above thresholds.
     However, their environmental implications shall be assessed and a due diligence report shall be
     prepared with environmental management plan for any potential impacts. School infrastructures
     with more than the threshold value will require an EIA level study, and will not be considered
     under the SSP.

     15.    EA and IA shall observe full compliance with the provisions of the EMF, which covers the
     environmental laws and regulations of the Government of Nepal and the environmental policy
     requirements of the development partners of the Program including the ADB and the World
     Bank.
              2.       Review of Institutional Capacity of EA and IA

     16.    Table 3 presents capacity analysis of the EA (Ministry of Education) and IA (Department
     of Education).
                   Table 3: Existing Capacity of EA and IA in environment management
 S.N.       Agency                             Existing Capacity                               Existing Resources
                           Knowledge /                    Manpower                       Environmen Provisi     Logisti
                            Experience                                                     t Desk       on of    cs and
                                in                                                                     Budget Facilitie
                           Environment                                                                              s
                                al
                           Management
1             MOE                           No institutional setup or position to look
                                 X                                                           No         No        No
                                            after environmental safeguards.
2             DOE                           Engineer assigned additional
                                            environmental tasks in addition to his/her
                                 X√         technical responsibilities. Basic                No         No        No
                                            knowledge on environmental safeguard is
                                            inadequate.
3             DEO                           No institutional setup or position or
                                 X          assigned personnel for environmental             No         No        No
                                            safeguard.
4             SMC                           They have not received awareness about
                                 X                                                           No         No        No
                                            this.
Note: X: Lack of capacity, X√: Basic Knowledge, √: Adequate capacity

     17.     A safeguard desk shall be established at the central office of DOE within the physical
     services section of the department. A fulltime Environment Specialist shall be appointed who
     shall lead the safeguard desk. The specialist shall cover environmental safeguard issues
     including mainstreaming of environmental best practices, coordinate environmental
     management activities in school programs, and facilitate capacity building activities of central
     and local level stakeholders. A safeguard desk shall be established at the DEOs, who shall
     designate focal persons responsible for planning, assessment, and implementation of EMP, and
     monitoring and reporting of environmental safeguards activities in the district programs. The
     focal person will coordinate with the safeguard desk at the center.

     18.    Central, regional, district and field level orientation and capacity development programs
     in ensuring environmental safeguards shall be designed in the program.
6


C.     GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND ACTION PLAN FOR EMF

19.    The DOE will follow a set of principles in implementing the infrastructures under SSP to
ensure environmental sustainability of the subprojects. The general principles of the
environmental management in the Program will be as mentioned below.

       (i)      The Safeguard Desk or designated environmental and social officers of the
                physical services section at the Department of Education (DOE) shall be
                responsible for undertaking overall environmental compliance in the Program
                activities. A full time environment specialist shall be appointed to lead the
                Safeguard Desk.
       (ii)     Safeguard Desk at the District Education Offices (DEOs) shall be responsible for
                undertaking overall environmental compliance in the subproject activities in the
                district. A qualified person (program coordinator or his/her assigned official,
                preferably engineer/overseer with environment/social experience) shall be
                designated to lead the Safeguard Desks. They shall be responsible for
                subproject specific EMP compliance and reporting.
       (iii)    All the subprojects to be funded under the Program shall be subject to
                environmental screening/assessment in order to prevent adverse environmental
                impacts.
       (iv)     Implementation of school infrastructure shall follow the National Environmental
                Guideline for School Improvement and Facility Management prepared by the
                Government, Nepal National Building Code, and design guidelines for school
                building construction (refer attachment 7) to avoid or minimize environmental
                impacts.
       (v)      Child-friendly (well lighted and well ventilated), earthquake resistant, aesthetically
                pleasing school shall be promoted.
       (vi)     Design of school infrastructures shall harmonize with local surroundings, and be
                careful towards disaster risk management and climate change risk mitigation
                measures.
       (vii)    Priority shall be given on the use of locally available construction materials.
                Preservation of the surrounding ecosystems around the school building shall be
                maintained. Sensitive ecological areas shall be avoided. Indigenous tree species
                shall be given priority for plantation.
       (viii)   Design and construction of school building at vulnerable areas with risks of slide,
                erosion or flood shall consider design for disaster risk minimization and resilience
                to extreme climatic variations (eg. raising plinth level to protect from flood, raising
                school building above highest flood level on struts, increase strength of building
                to resist storm, avoid river bank erosion area, avoid or stabilize landslide areas
                and retrofitting to reduce risks of earthquake).
       (ix)     Alternative solutions and final designs shall be subjected to community
                consultation, particularly with students and teachers, and their suggestions shall
                be given priority.
       (x)      Water availability in school area shall be ensured. Promote rain water harvesting
                in schools.
       (xi)     Annual water quality monitoring shall be carried out on all the installed tube-wells
                under the Program to ensure safe drinking water facilities to the students and
                teachers.
       (xii)    Provision for adequate sanitation facilities shall be developed for the teachers
                and students with regular cleaning and routine maintenance. The toilets for girls
                and boys shall be separate with privacy and water facility.
                                                                                                             7


         (xiii)    Environment friendly and energy-efficient options (solar power) shall be
                   promoted.
         (xiv)     Prefer use of local construction materials.

D.       ANTICIPATED ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS

20.     The environmental assessment matrix shows that most of the proposed policy actions
will not impact the environment, while the policy action aiming to make access to education
more equitable might have some negligible impacts related to school and classroom
construction. Construction activities will be accommodated within the existing school premises
avoiding private property including land acquisition.

21.     The experience of ESP III and SSRP has found that most of the policy interventions by
the SSP will provide positive impacts on local environmental setting. Similarly, the policy action
to make access to education more equitable, which includes construction of school
infrastructure, especially classrooms and district education office buildings, will also contribute
positively to the local environment by developing a healthy and safer school environment with
natural light and well ventilated classrooms, structures resilient to environmental extremes
(including climate variability such as severe storms and geophysical hazards such as
earthquakes and landslides), improve hygiene among children, provide clean drinking water
safe against arsenic and fluoride contamination. The safer school will also provide multiple
services to community. Capacity building of stakeholders in environmental safeguards, including
improved methods of construction, retrofitting of old structures, and preparation of resilient
infrastructure will enhance knowledge and awareness for sustainable school infrastructure
development in the future. Nevertheless, construction activity may cause some adverse
environmental impacts, which will require careful management. These impacts can be avoided
or significantly reduced by adopting the Government‟s National Environmental Guideline for
School Improvement and Facility Management, and the National Building Code for design and
implementation of school infrastructure and by adopting mitigation measures as identified in
EMP of IEE report or DDR.

22.    Some typical environmental impacts and mitigation measures from school infrastructure
construction and operation activities are listed in the following Table 4, which shall be treated as
a guide during environmental assessment, EMP preparation, and implementation (also refer
attachment 7).

                  Table 4: Potential Environmental Impact and Mitigation Measures
   Category              Potential Impact                                 Mitigation Measures
Slope stability    Landslide or gully erosion on   Follow National Environmental Guideline for School Improvement
                   slopes that may threaten        and Facility Management for site selection, design and monitoring
                   school infrastructure.          activities.
                                                   Avoid or maintain adequate distance from landslide or erosion
                                                   areas.
                                                   Adopt right angle of cut on slopes.
                                                   Stabilize slopes by engineering and bio-engineering measures.
                                                   Measures taken to avoid undercutting of hill toes that may cause
                                                   slide.
                                                   Use check dam and channeling of water to avoid erosion and slide.
                                                   Do not exert excess load on slopes by disposing spoil.
Spoil disposal        Damage of agriculture and    Minimize spoil by balancing cut and fill wherever possible.
                      forest land                  Restrict disposal of spoil on agriculture land or forest area.
                      Drainage blockage causing    Manage spoil to reclaim land with proper landscaping and
                      erosion                      vegetation.
8


    Category         Potential Impact                                    Mitigation Measures
                   Spoil tipped over slope         Do not dispose spoil on drainage path.
                   may cause slide
Drainage           Drainage congestion             Design adequate drainage passage following natural path.
Management         Water logging                   Fill ditches in school premises
                   Vector proliferation            Discharge drainage flow with proper downstream protection.
                                                   Cover bigger size drainage channels
                                                   Drainages shall be with required sand traps, generally at 20 m
                                                   intervals
Water              Lack of water supply.           Ensure availability of adequate drinking water supply to the school.
Availability and   Sub-standard or                 Regular testing of drinking water at least once a year.
Quality            inadequate drinking water       Arsenic test in ground water in terai districts is recommended.
                   provided to students.           Adequate water for sanitation is available.
                   Students fall sick due to       Promote efficient and rational use of water, incorporation of rain
                   waterborne disease.             water harvesting system in schools.
                                                   Asses alternative if existing source of water is drying up due to
                                                   climate variations.
Loss of land       No additional land will be   Resettlement and or land acquisition problems are not anticipated in
                   required, as all             SSP. The DOE will not do any involuntary land acquisition. All
                   construction work will be    donations and purchases, if any, will be voluntary. DOE will not only
                   done within the premises     ensure that land donations are fully voluntary, but also that such
                   of school. Any new area      donations do not involve physical displacement or any significant
                   required will be through     adverse impacts upon incomes of the donor household. All voluntary
                   voluntary donation by land   land transactions will meet the criteria as mentioned in resettlement
                   owners or buying in the      framework of the Program.
                   market through direct
                   negotiation.
Location of        Encroachment in protected       Avoid national parks, conservation areas, wetland and other
School in          areas                           ecologically sensitive areas for establishing school
protected          Impact on biodiversity          Restrict disturbance and harassment to wildlife.
areas, buffer      Disturbance to wildlife         Restrict use of catapult by students
zones, and         habitat                         Do not work at night near high biodiversity areas
critical                                           Plant trees around school infrastructure.
habitats.
Clearing of        Trees removed for               Felled trees are replaced by compensatory plantation at minimum
trees              construction of school          1:1 ratio.
                   infrastructure.                 Plant trees at periphery of school to serve as dust and noise barrier.
                   Loss of habitat.                Be careful not to block air flow, natural light and sun light reaching
                                                   the class rooms.
Quarries and       Pollution, disturbance and      Quarry shall be approved by Engineer.
borrow pits        damages (slope failure,         Quarries safely closed by re-grading slopes, protected by structures,
                   bank cutting) from quarry       and vegetation, as necessary.
                   operations
                   Safety risks from
                   abandoned quarries or
                   borrow pits
Stone crushing     Dust and noise pollution        Locate crusher plant, if any, away from settlement, school, and
                                                   forest area.
                                                   Enclose and use water sprinkler to arrest dust.
                                                   Buy required material from authorized operating plants.
Air and noise      Dust nuisance to children       Dust generating type of work is done during off-school time.
pollution          from construction works         Labors use mask and safety gears.
                                                   Water sprinkled on road surface and work areas.
                                                   Cover material during transportation.
                                                   Plant trees to act as dust barrier.
                                                                                                                  9


  Category             Potential Impact                                    Mitigation Measures
                   Air pollution generated due      Old school buses shall be well maintained.
                   to old school buses              Exhaust pollution test regularly done.
                   Dust and noise generated         Traffic sign shall be kept mentioning “School Zone”, Speed control
                   by vehicles passing by           measures like bumps shall be kept. Plantation of trees around
                   schools                          periphery of school will act as dust and noise barrier.
                   Noise during construction        Arrange work schedule at off-school time to minimize disturbance
                   of schools                       while doing work that may generate noise above the threshold.
Employment         Local people employed in         Construction methods shall be within the skills of local people.
opportunity        project activities               Contractors encouraged using local labor, wherever possible.
Separate           Girl student opt out of          Provide separate toilets at adequate distance between boys and
toilets for boys   school due to lack of            girls.
and girls          separate toilet facility.        Water supply is available in the toilets.
                                                    One latrine should be designed for about 30 pupils (20 for girls and
                                                    40 for boys).
                                                    Stagger break time as required
Ensure safe        Arsenic and pollution            Arrange water supply facility as one of priority in schools
drinking water     contained drinking water         Adopt rain water harvesting for non-drinking purpose
to schools         hazardous for health             Annually test water quality
                   Lack of sufficient water for     Practice conservation of water and train students not to waste water
                   drinking and sanitation
Occupational       Lack of minimum required         Insure all workers
health and         facilities of space,             Provide adequate space with ventilation, clean toilets, solid waste
safety             ventilation, sanitation, light   management, light and safe drinking water in camps
                   and safe drinking water in       Provide mosquito net at labor camps
                   camps.                           Keep camp and work area clean and without water logging
                   Lack of safety tools             Highest priority to safe construction practices
                   Lack of safe construction        Provide safety gears to workers working in hazardous areas
                   practices                        Keep first aid box ready at work areas and camps
                   Vector disease
Solid waste        Spreading of waste,              Proper solid waste management system shall be introduced in
management         pungent smell,                   schools with segregation of waste, and its proper disposal.
                   deterioration of aesthetics      Encourage composting to use in school garden.
Hazardous          Use batteries, laboratory        Awareness raising on solid waste management with waste
waste              chemicals disposed               minimization, recovery and recycling.
                   haphazardly.                     Ban use of plastic products in schools.
                                                    Safe disposal of hazardous waste.
Health,            Unhealthy living condition       Promote health measures in schools. (hand washing facilities, safe
hygiene, and       in school                        disposal of human excreta, supply of clean and treated water, etc).
food safety        Food related diseases            The norms prescribed for toilet by NEGSIFMIN shall be followed.
Community          Project related hazards to       Identify and assess risks to potential impacts during all stages of
health and         communities                      project
safety                                              Establish preventive and protective measures
                                                    Conduct public health information and education program for critical
                                                    issues like STDs and HIV/AIDS
                                                    Fencing and posting warning signs at work areas

Orientation of     Impact on comfort of             Design and construct climate friendly school buildings.
school.            students.                        Orientation determines magnitude of natural heating and lighting
                   Impact on energy                 available inside the building. Orientations shall be based on the
                   efficiency.                      climate type of the place where school facilities are planned.
                                                    Natural lighting and orientation of school building shall be integral
                                                    part of design. Use of renewable energy like solar shall be
                                                    promoted.
                                                    In hot climate, using GI sheet roof in school means subjecting
                                                    school kids to high temperatures. Innovative ways need to be looked
                                                    at to address such issues.
                                                    Use of energy efficient bulbs and equipments in schools.
                                                    Awareness generation of students to bring a change in culture to be
10


     Category         Potential Impact                                 Mitigation Measures
                                                 environment friendly.
Use of wood        Deforestation                 Minimize use of wood for construction.
As                                               Use local materials as much as possible.
construction                                     Innovations shall be integrated in design for making schools more
materials                                        child and environmentally friendly.
                                                 Contractor shall supply kerosene or LPG at camps and restrict
Material                                         cooking and heating in firewood
specifications

Cooking and
heating by
firewood in
camps
School safety      Damages to school             Incorporate safety measures during site selection and design of
(fire,             properties.                   physical facilities.
earthquake,        Possible human harm.          Create awareness about natural calamities and extreme climate to
hail stone,                                      teachers and students.
thunder storm,                                   Retrofitting of old structures for safety against earthquake. Make
flood etc)                                       new structures earthquake resistant.
                                                 Construction of flood protection for schools in flood plain areas.
                                                 Allow safe passage to storm drainage.
                                                 Necessary preparedness and emergency rescue measures shall be
                                                 an integral part of the program.
                                                 Awareness generation among students in the event of disaster.
Emergency          Increased risks to students   Schools shall prepare emergency plan and conduct regular drill
situation          during disaster.              Establish emergency contact and communication system
during disaster                                  Ensure emergency equipments and facilities like fire
                                                 extinguisher/water hose, first aid boxes, whistles, torch lights etc.
                                                 Establish evacuation route and meeting points


E.       ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
         (EMP)

         1.       Environmental Screening and Categorization of Subprojects

23.     An environmental screening using rapid environmental assessment (REA) checklist shall
be done to ascertain environmental category of each school infrastructure. Initial Environmental
Examination (IEE) shall be carried out for category B investment. IEE will not be required for
category C subprojects, but a due diligence report (DDR) shall be prepared. This EMF provides
guideline to prepare both IEE report and environmental DDR. An outline of these reports is
provided in attachment 4 and 5 to this EMF respectively.

         2.       Environmental Assessment Procedure

24.     The environmental assessment procedure for each school infrastructure shall be as
follows:
25.
              a.    Environmental Screening

26.     The environmental screening of the subprojects shall be done by using the Rapid
Environmental Assessment (REA) checklist (included as Attachment 1). The REA checklist shall
be filled prior to detailed design of the proposed investment. Findings of the environmental
screening shall conclude if an IEE is required or a brief DDR will be adequate for the
                                                                                                     11


infrastructure. The IEE or DDR report shall be attached with detailed design of the
infrastructure.

                    b.       Process for Environmental Due Diligence

27.     The environmental due diligence report will be a brief environmental statement of the
subproject with only significant impacts, if any. The report shall be prepared by adopting
following procedure:

       (i)          Collection of information. Coordination shall be maintained with the focal
                    person of safeguard desk of DEO, and technical team for documenting site-
                    specific environmental concerns. Local stakeholders including teacher and
                    students shall be consulted during documentation of the information.
       (ii)         Preparation of environmental due diligence report. The information on
                    physical, biological and socio-economic and cultural environment of the
                    subproject area will be compiled in coordination with the technical and social
                    team. The environmental due diligence report shall be prepared with REA
                    checklist added with any site-specific and significant environmental impacts. The
                    proposed template for the environmental due diligence report is presented in
                    Attachment 4.

                    c.       Process to prepare Initial Environmental Examination (IEE)

28.     There could be few subprojects attracting initial environmental examination for which IEE
report shall be prepared. The IEE process shall involve following:
              i.    Scoping and preparation of TOR for IEE Study: An IEE scoping is a planning
                    exercise to determine the scope for the IEE study. Scoping quickly assess the
                    existing environmental status of the project area, lists the likely environmental
                    impacts, and advise methodology of assessment. The TOR also advise team of
                    experts for the assessment and study schedule. The TOR shall be approved by
                    MOE before commencing the IEE study.
              ii.    Assessment Methods: An outline of the activities for conducting IEE study are
                     presented below:

                    (i)     Desk Study. Review of information such as maps, reports, and EMF for the
                            Project. Checklist for collecting site information is also finalized.
                    (ii)    Consultations. communities and local stakeholders (teacher, students,
                            parents, social workers etc.) shall be consulted by means of Focus Group
                            Discussions (FGD). If required, discussion with concerned government
                            offices (soil and watershed conservation; forest; water supply) will also be
                            undertaken.
                    (iii)   Field Assessment. Assessment of the potential and significant
                            environmental concerns shall be done to collect data and analyze any
                            potential impacts.
                    (iv)    Sampling and Testing. Special tests may be necessary in certain cases
                            where water pollution issues need to be investigated (water quality for
                            arsenic or fluoride content, noise level, PM 10 in air).
                    (v)     Consideration of Alternatives. The environmental implications of different
                            alternatives will be briefly assessed, particularly focusing on location of
12


                       infrastructure, design and orientation, method of construction, source of
                       construction materials, schedule of construction ).
                (vi) Identification of Environmental Impacts and Mitigation Measures. The
                       impacts will be identified in terms of their significance, extent, reversibility,
                       and duration.
                (vii) Design of Environmental Monitoring Plan. The IEE or DDR shall
                       propose EMP where monitoring requirements for potential environmental
                       impacts are identified, mitigation measures prepared, method of mitigation
                       measure developed, indicators suggested, frequency of undertaking
                       monitoring activity decided, cost estimated, and responsible agency for
                       undertaking the monitoring identified.
                (viii) IEE Report. IEE report shall be prepared in brief following the template
                       presented in attachment 5.

F.      INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT AND MECHANISM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF
        EMP

        1.      Institutional Arrangement

29.     Ministry of Education is the executing agency (EA) and the Department of Education
(DOE) is the implementing agency (IA) of the Program. The physical services section of the
DOE is responsible for design and implementation of physical infrastructures. DOE allocates
program and budget to all 75 District Education Offices (DEOs), who allocate program and
budget to recipient school. Schools are fully responsible to implement their program under
technical supervision of DEO. However, both the MOE and DOE lack environment specialist to
look after environmental safeguards in the agency operations. The SMC and schools also lack
adequate capacity to deal with environmental issues. The National Environmental Guidelines for
School Improvement and Facility Management in Nepal 2004 (NEGSIFMIN) guides for ensuring
environmental safeguards in MOE/DOE operations. Implementation arrangement for the school
infrastructure development is presented in following Table 5.

             Table 5: Implementation Mechanism for Infrastructure Development
 S.N.     Activity                        Implementation Mechanism                      Responsibility
1.      Classroom      School Selection
        construction      Physical Survey of Schools                                      DOE/PSS
                          Technical staff of DEO will use the standard format
                          developed by DOE & conduct a survey of overall school in
                          the district
                          Preparation of School Physical Facilities Improvement
                          Plan (SPIP)                                                     DEO
                          SMC will prepare SPIP. This includes activities to be
                          performed in schools, estimated cost to perform such            SMC
                          activities and contribution of schools in such activities
                          Analysis of Education Data
                          Insert date on Education Management Information System
                          (EMIS) & analyze educational indicators
                       Prioritization of Schools Selection                                DEO/PSS
                       Based on educational indicators given in Annex – I school are
                                                                                          DEO
                       prioritized for support
                          Program Setting
                          The whole school approach concept shall be followed in
                                                                                                       13


S.N.     Activity                         Implementation Mechanism                          Responsibility
                         order to completely include all the facilities for school & get
                         approved from DEO. The approval of DEO/AREA officer is
                         required prior the expenses of such construction budget by
                         the school.
                         Preparation of Cost Estimates
                         Prepare cost estimates of each individual components of
                         school physical facilities and getting approval from DEO. The
                         district rates & GON norms should be followed in cost
                         estimates. The cost should include the contribution from
                         school & program.
                         Agreement with School
                         Based on the cost estimate & indicating the clear cut
                         responsibilities of local community an agreement is signed
                         between DEO & SMC. The name of schools & list of
                         activities/programs to be conducted in such schools, DEO will
                         arrange technicians
                         Release of Funds to Schools
                         Upon technical clearance for construction of such selected
                         schools, the fund will be released to respective schools.
                         Expenditure by School is Tied with Work Progress
                         Based on progress of work, the fund will be released/spent
                         by the school.
                         Documentation
                         DEO shall prepare a documentation related to construction of
                         school (i.e. Physical survey form, agreement, evaluation
                         document, measurement book, report). Each 2 sets of
                         documents are prepared. One set will be retained at school &
                         another set shall be forwarded to DEO.
                         Supervision of Construction Works
                         DEOs will assign technical personnel (Engineer/Sub
                         Engineer) to supervise & monitor construction activities in
                         schools. For this, there is also a practice of utilizing
                         technicians through NGOs/INGOs as per the MOU.
                         Construction should Comply with Agreement
                         Construction should comply with clauses of agreement. The
                         breach of contract, sub standard work & delay could subject
                         to legal action by DEO to chairman of SMC & personnel
                         involved.
                         There should be provision for RAMP to wheel chair users.
2.     Support to     1. Implementation mechanisms same as 1                                 DOE
       school water   2. Other Requirements
                                                                                             DEO
       supply            a. Water Availability for drinking & sanitation.
       system as a       b. Tube well should be at least 15m from soak pit or septic         SMC
       part of              tank.                                                            Community
       improving         c. The fencing of school & external environment improvement
       external             is entirely the responsibility of school.
       environment
3.     Separate       1. Implementation mechanism same as 1                                  DOE/PSS
       Toilet for     2. Other Requirements
                                                                                             DEO
       Boys & Girls      a. The boys & girls toilet should maintain a distance
                         b. Construction of RAMP for wheel chair users                       SMC
                         c. Availability of water in school for water supply & sanitation    Community
                            purposes
14


 S.N.          Activity                     Implementation Mechanism                                Responsibility
                            d. Other requirements as of no. 2
4.      Construction        Based on DOEs design/drawing the cost estimates shall be                  DOE/PSS
        of District         prepared. The norms shall follow district & GON. The
        Education           procurement of work shall follow as per procurement                       DEO
        Office              guidelines of GON. The tender document shall be prepared.
        Building            1 set of tender document should be sent to DOE/PSS.
                            Publish tender notice
                            Evaluate the bids
                            Agreement with bidders. A copy shall be forwarded to
                            DOE/PSS
                            Under the close supervision of technician construction work
                            should be done

         2.         Mechanism for Implementation of EMP

30.      Implementation of mitigation measures shall be ensured by following the EMP:

         (i)        Integrating EMP provisions in program design: In terms of specific mitigation
                    measures, cost, and specific implementation criteria.
         (ii)       Implementation modality: Most of physical construction works and monitoring
                    shall be directly done through SMCs closely supervised by DEOs. Their capacity
                    development in environmental monitoring shall be enhanced.
         (iii)      Bill of Quantities: The tender instruction to bidders shall clearly mention the
                    specific mitigation measures identified in EMP with cost.
         (iv)       Supervision and Monitoring: A mechanism for systematic and hierarchical
                    monitoring and reporting system shall be established by making the safeguard
                    desks overall responsible.

31.    Implementation of the EMF must be integrated into program‟s overall planning, design,
budget, and implementation.

32.     The key agencies involved in implementation of this framework are MOE, DOE, District
Education Offices (DEO), and School Management Committees (SMCs). MOE/DOE has overall
coordination responsibility. The DEO and SMC have planning and implementation
responsibilities at the district and community levels respectively. The Department of Education
(DOE) and District Education Office (DEO) will implement and monitor compliance of the
provisions in the EMF.

33.      Following Table 6 presents the mechanism of implementation of the EMF.

                           Table 6: Mechanism for Implementation of EMF
S.N.                     Activities                      Responsibilities                  Remarks
1.   Preparation of EMF, Its Approval, Circulation
     & Incorporation in Program
1.1 Approval of EMF for SSP                              MOE
1.2 Printing, Publication of EMF in Nepali & its wider   DOE                DOE provides EMF guidelines to DEOs
     circulation                                                            for implementation
1.3 Dissemination of EMF through Program                 DOE/DEO            DOE will ensure that stakeholders e.g.
     Implementation Manual (PIM)                                            DEO, SMC and others understands the
                                                                            EMF requirements and EMF provisions
                                                                            are followed while planning and
                                                                                                                    15


S.N.                      Activities                     Responsibilities                     Remarks
                                                                            implementation of school physical
                                                                            improvement programs (SPIP) and DEO
                                                                            Office buildings.
1.4    Incorporation of EMF aspects in SIP               DEO/ SMC           DOE will ensure that EMF is an integral
                                                                            part of decision making for SSP activities.

1.5    Dissemination of EMF through regular              DOE/       DEO/ All are made aware on how to incorporate
       orientation programs organized for Engineers,     Partner INGOs   EMF provisions in planning and
       Sub-Engineers, District Education Officers,                       implementing SIP
       I/NGOs and other partners working in
       collaboration with DOE.
2.     Environmental Assessment & Management
2.1    Environmental Screening of infrastructure using   DEO                REA checklist provided in the EMF.
       the REA checklist                                                    Categorize environmental assessment
                                                                            type (IEE or DDR).
2.2    Incorporate EMF requirements in SIP               DOE                Follow provisions of the approved EMF
       preparation guidelines
2.3    Environmental assessment of the works.            DOE                Follow the steps given in the approved
       Prepare environmental management plan.                               EMF
2.4    Incorporation of EMP provisions in contract       DEO                EMP requirements clearly defined in BOQ
       document                                                             and contract agreement.
2.5    Utilize EMF requirements in school construction   SMC                Follow provisions as advised in SIP
3.     EMP Monitoring
         during implementation                           DOE supervised DEO will conduct routine monitoring,
         quarterly, feeding into government's quarterly by DOE              document compliance or non-compliance,
         portfolio review meeting                                           fill monitoring checklist, and prepare
                                                                            monthly reporting. DOE will check
         verification with field visit to representative
                                                                            adequacy of environmental safeguards
         samples
                                                                            maintained in district works. Verifies if
                                                                            EMP recommendations are being
                                                                            complied into subprojects implementation.
                                                                            Consolidate quarterly progress report.
4.     Monitoring & Auditing
       Compliance Audit                                  MOE/DOE            Verifies overall compliance to EMF &
         during Implementation                           Central Level      other environmental safeguard
         annually                                        Team   (as  an     requirements.
                                                         integral part of
                                                         overall program
                                                         implementation
                                                         audit)
                                                         Visits random
                                                         representative
                                                         samples.
5.     Annual Reporting & Feedback
         interactions/workshops                          DOE (DOE           DOE will conduct an annual interaction to
         reports                                         reports  status    replicate the best practices.
                                                         and
                                                         environmental
                                                         functioning of the
                                                         infrastructure, &
                                                         recommendations
                                                         for improvement
                                                         to MOE)

          3.       Capacity Development

34.   Capacity in environmental management needs to be strengthened at all levels of the EA
and IAs including MOE, DOE, DEO and SMC. GON will implement capacity strengthening
16


measures through training and orientations. Following capacity development program has been
recommended:
                         Table 7: Capacity Development Program
     S. No.               Particular of Activities                                 Remarks
              EMF translation to Nepali, Printing          &
       1.
              Publication
                                                             Monitoring & Supervision Arrangements for
       2.     Technical Strengthening of DOE
                                                             DOE, DEO etc)
                                                             In order to safeguard environmental concerns
              Recruitment of full-time Environmental Officer
          2.1                                                GON will recruit a separate environmental officer
              at DOE
                                                             at DOE
                                                             Environmental officer will lead the safeguard
              Setting up a safeguard desk in DOE and
          2.2                                                desk at DOE, whereas designated person will
              DEOs
                                                             lead the desks in DEOs
              Capacity Building Program to MOE, DOE,
                                                             Detail Capacity Building Program will be
              DEOs and SMCs (Training, Research &
       3.                                                    Developed by DOE as per need for EMF
              Development)
                                                             Implementation


       4.        Budgetary Requirement

35.    The tentative budgetary requirement for implementation of EMF may include as
presented in following Table 8

                              Table 8: Cost for Implementation of EMF
     S. No.               Particular of Activities                                Cost (in $)
              EMF translation to Nepali, Printing &
       1.                                                      5,000.00
              Publication, and distribution (500 copies)
              Technical Strengthening of DOE in safeguard
       2.
              compliance
              Recruitment of full-time Environmental Officer
          2.1                                                  Department cost
              at DOE
              Setting up a safeguard desk in DOE and
          2.2                                                  25,000.00
              DEOs
              Capacity building of MOE, DOE, DEOs and
          2.3 SMCs (Training, Research & Development)          100,000.00

              Environmental screening, preparation of
                                                        to be included in the subproject cost at the rate
       3.     environmental assessment reports and EMPs
                                                        of about $2000 per IEE and $500 per DDR
              Environmental monitoring by DEOs and
                                                               To be included in subproject cost at the rate of
       4.     DOE/MOE, and reporting.
                                                               $1,000.


G.     ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND REPORTING

36.     The purpose of environmental supervision is to make sure that specific mitigation
measures identified in the environmental assessment and agreed in the contract are
satisfactorily implemented. In addition, monitoring is necessary to ensure that the envisaged
purpose of the project are achieved and results in desired benefits to the target population
without adversely affecting natural environmental resources. The monitoring activities of the
Program will include verifying compliance with the environmental management plan during
project implementation. In general, the environmental specialist of IA will monitor the following
indicators: (i) loss of agricultural lands; (ii) drainage congestion/water logging; (iii) surface water
                                                                                                           17


pollution; (iv) dust and noise pollution; (v) distance between tubewells and sanitary latrines; vii)
occupational health and safety arrangements; viii) maintenance of water supply and sanitation
facilities, (ix) impact of climate change and disasters and their management, etc. A
Management Information System (MIS) will be developed to record the environmental mitigation
and monitoring information along with infrastructure development data. A climate change
adaptation and disaster risk reduction plan will also be developed.

37.    In addition, testing for arsenic in drinking water will be carried out at required intervals in
arsenic potential areas. 5% of the total water samples will be tested in laboratory for quality
assurance.

38.    A quick monitoring of operation and maintenance of water supply and sanitation facilities
shall be conducted by the DOE and DEO to provide direct feedback to School Management
Committees. A quick monitoring may include the following indicators:

          (i)       Is the latrine and the area around it clean?
          (ii)      Is the latrine and the area around it free from fly nuisance?
          (iii)     Is there a cover or other means to keep the flies out?
          (iv)      Is the latrine and the area around it free from odors?
          (v)       Is the area around the latrine free from stagnant water?
          (vi)      Is the latrine slab smooth and easy to clean?
          (vii)     Is the latrine slab strong and without any cracks?
          (viii)    Is the tube-well platform clean?
          (ix)      Are there proper drainage facilities?
          (x)       Are hand-washing facilities available in or near the latrine?

39.     Implementation of mitigation measures will be ensured through both routine and periodic
monitoring. Monitoring activities for project at different phases of implementation will be as
follows:

                            Table 9: A Sample of Pre Construction Monitoring
                                                     Types of Monitoring/    Monitoring
    S.N.           Indicators of Monitoring                                               Responsibility
                                                     Method of Monitoring    Frequency
     1.       Printing, publication & distribution     Direct observation      Once           DOE
              of EMF to all stakeholders (DOE,
              DEO, SMC)
     2.       Full-time environmental officer at     Review of appointment     Once        MOE / DOE
              DOE                                            letter
     3.       Incorporation of EMF in SIP            Review of documents       Once           DEO
     4.       Disaster prone area (slide, flood,     Review of documents       Once         DOE/DEO
              drought area) and climate risk
              screening done
     5.       Incorporation EMP in design and          Direct observation      Once           DOE
              tender document
18


                       Table 10: A Sample of Construction Phase Monitoring

                                                  Types of Monitoring/         Monitoring
     S.N.    Indicators of Monitoring                                                         Responsibility
                                                  Method of Monitoring         Frequency

      1.     Drinking Water Quality                 Sampling, lab testing     Annual          SMC
                                                    & comparison with                         Note: DEO shall
                                                    generic standards                         coordinate with
                                                    For Arsenic, testing                      district Dept. of
                                                    follow protocols                          water supply &
                                                    mentioned in EFA                          sanitation, NGO,
                                                    document                                  INGOs working
                                                                                              in water &
                                                                                              sanitation
                                                                                              sectors.
      2.     Transportation of construction      CM/Direct Observation          Regular              SMC
             material in covered condition,                                     during
             and safe loading & unloading of                                  construction
             construction materials.
      3.     Water sprinkling in dusty           CM/Direct Observation         Every Day            SMC
             construction area & access
             roads
      4.     Stockpiling of excavated            CM/Direct Observation          Everyday            SMC
             materials
      5.     Reuse of excavated materials        CM/Direct Observation          Everyday            SMC
      6.     Solid waste segregation             CM/Direct Observation          Everyday            SMC
             disposal
      7.     Encroachment of forest,             CM/Direct Observation           During          DEO/SMC
             clearing of trees                                                 construction
                                                                                once in 3
                                                                                 months
      8.     Quarry & Borrow Pits                Direct Observation             Quarterly        DEO/SMC
      9.     Occupational health and safety,     Direct Observation           Once a month       DEO/SMC
             use of safety gears
      10.    Safety to children                  Record of injury             Once a week        DEO/SMC
      11.    Water logging and vector            Direct Observation           Once a week        DEO/SMC
             proliferation

                         Table 11: A Sample of Operation Phase Monitoring
                                                   Types of Monitoring/        Monitoring
     S.N.        Indicators of Monitoring                                                     Responsibility
                                                   Method of Monitoring        Frequency
      1.    Preparation of monitoring reports     Records/Documents              Monthly           DOE
      2.    Drinking water quality                Samples taken from             Annual            DEO
                                                  different points, source,     II.              V.
            Arsenic testing and mitigation        delivery points
                                                  Laboratory testing             Annual            DOE
                                                                                III.             VI.
            Adequate natural light, air           Interview with students
            ventilation                                                         IV.              VII.

                                                                                 Annual          DEO/SMU
                                                                                                 VIII.

      3.    Solid waste management system         Records of waste              Bi-annual        DEO/SMU
                                                  collected and managed
      4.    Rainwater harvesting                  Observation                   Annual           DEO/SMU
      5.    Number of orientation and training    Number of orientation         Regular          DOE/DEO
                                                  and trainings conducted
      6.    Clean and renewable energy            Observation                    Annual          DOE/DEO
                                                                                                    19


     7.        Impact audit                 Compliance with EMF        Annual        DOE/DEO

40.    The MOE/DOE will monitor the provisions mentioned in the frameworks to ensure that
they are complied with during implementation of the SSP. The MOE/DOE will prepare bi-annual
reports on environmental compliance and submit this during the Joint Consultative Mission
(JCM) and Joint Annual Review (JAR). In addition, a section on status of environmental
safeguard activities will be included in each progress report.

41.    DOE will carry out annual review to assess how effectively the environmental safeguard
requirements have been followed.

H.        CONSULTATION, INFORMATION DISCLOSURE, AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS
          MECHANISM

42.     The EMF will be shared by the executing agency (EA) with all the concerned
stakeholders. After the final approval, this will be translated in Nepali and distributed to relevant
stakeholders. The EMF will be posted in the official web site of MOE/DOE. It will be part of the
project implementation manual.

          1.        Consultation and Information Disclosure

43.    Consultation and information disclosure will be a continuous process during the
preparation of the environmental assessment document and implementation of the EMP. The
EA will ensure to conduct meaningful consultation with affected people and concerned
stakeholders, including civil society and facilitate their informed participation. The meaningful
consultation shall begin early in the subproject preparation stage and carried out in an ongoing
basis throughout the subproject cycle, timely disclosure in understandable format by the local
stakeholders; consultation is organized in congenial environment without intimidation, and is
gender sensitive. The process and results shall be documented and incorporated in the
environmental assessment report.
44.    The EA shall provide relevant environmental information, including the IEE and
environmental monitoring report in a timely manner, and shall keep the reports at accessible
place and in a form and language understandable to affected people and other stakeholders.
The EA shall submit to ADB the final IEE report and environmental monitoring reports for
disclosure on ADB‟s website.

          2.        Grievance Redress Mechanism

45.     DOE will establish a procedure to answer queries related to land acquisition and school
in regards to additional physical infrastructure and/or new construction. SMC at each school and
District Education ommittee at DEO will work as a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) for
hearing the complaints of different stakeholders and for their appropriate resolution. Other than
disputes relating to legal rights, it will review all grievances relating to land acquisition and other
SSP interventions. Grievances will be redressed within two to four weeks from the date of
lodging the complaints.
46.    If resolution attempts at the SMC level fail, the SMC will refer the complaints to DEO
along with the minutes of the hearings. If a decision made at this level is found unacceptable by
the aggrieved person, DEO can refer the case to DOE with the minutes of the hearings at both
school and district levels.
20


47.     To ensure impartiality and transparency, hearings on complaints will remain open to the
public. The GRCs will record the details of the complaints and the reasons that led to
acceptance or rejection of the particular cases. The SMC/DEO will keep records of all resolved
and unresolved complaints and grievances and make them available for review as and when
asked for by DOE, ADB and other development partners and any entities interested in the
program.

48.      The key functions of the GRCs shall be to (i) record the complains, categories and
prioritize them; (iii) settle the grievances in consultation with complainer and the Program staff;
(v) report to the aggrieved parties about the decision/solution; and (vi) forward the unresolved
cases to higher authorities.
              21




ATTACHMENTS
                                                                                                                                       22
                                                         ATTACHMENT 1
                                   FORMAT FOR RAPID ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT (REA) CHECKLIST
School name:                                              Proposed Infrastructure:
District:                                                                                                             Date:
                                                                                                 3
    Activity                                  Screening Questions                            Status       Scale of Impact     Remark
                                                                                            Yes No     High Medium Low

    A. Infrastructure       Is the school infrastructure adjacent to or within any of                   3.    4.
    Site                    the following environmentally sensitive areas?
                                 Protected area                                                  5.     6.    7.

                                 Wetland                                                         8.     9.    10.

                                 Buffer zone of protected area                                   11.    12.   13.

                                 Cultural heritage site                                          14.    15.   16.

                                 Underground utilities                                           17.    18.   19.

                                 Unstable slope, landslide, erosion area                         20.    21.   22.

                                 Flood prone area                                                23.    24.   25.

    B. Potential            Will the school infrastructure cause….
    Environmental
    Impacts
    Encroachment                 Historical or cultural areas
                                 Precious and sensitive ecological areas                         26.    27.   28.

    Slope Stability              Are there any landslides or other forms of mass
                                 instability and erosion on the slopes around the
                                 area?
    Spoil Disposal               Will the work produce significant amount of
                                 construction waste?
                                 Will there be requirement for disposal spoil
                                 material?

3
    Impacts shall be assessed and marked „Yes‟ only if they are significant in magnitude.
                                                                                    3
Activity                          Screening Questions                           Status       Scale of Impact   Remark
                                                                               Yes No     High Medium Low

                      Will spoil disposal can impact on farmland, forest?
Water Management      Will there be any long term impacts on local                  29.    30.   31.
                      hydrology?
                      Will there be any disruption of drinking or irrigation
                      water supplies?
                      Is adequate water supply to school available?
                      Will there be insufficient drainage leading to water
                      logging?
Land Acquisition      Will there be any acquisition of land?                               32.   33.
                      Will there be any dislocation of people?
                      Will there be any loss of agriculture land?
Plants and wildlife   Removal of trees in large number is required?
habitat               Will wildlife be disturbed due to construction
                      works?
                      Will there be any negative effects on rare,
                      threatened or endangered species of flora and
                      fauna or their habitat?
Quarry                Will operation of quarry, if any, be hazardous to
                      environment?
Hazardous             Will the project using any type of hazardous
Materials             material (e.g. bitumen, cement paint, explosive
                      fuels, lubricants etc) that may cause risk to
                      environment?
                      Are there potential risks to environment due to use
                      of laboratory chemicals?
Dust                  Will dust generated from construction works be a
                      nuisance?
Noise and Vibration   Any increased noise from construction?
                      Is blasting needed? Will there be risks due to                34.    35.   36.
                      vibration?
Water supply and      Will the work affect existing water supply and
sanitation            sanitation system?
Surface water         Will construction activities contaminate water?
Groundwater           Will there be any pollution of groundwater or
                      impact on long term groundwater flow?




                                                                                                                        23
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                     3
Activity                              Screening Questions                        Status       Scale of Impact             Remark
                                                                                Yes No     High Medium Low

Health and Safety         Are there any occupational and community health
                          and safety risks?
Social Issues             Are there possibility of conflict with local people
                          and community?
C. Potential
Positive
Environmental             Improved sanitation and personal hygiene                   37.    38.   39.
Impacts
                          Enhanced quality of school environment                     40.    41.   42.

                          Safe School resilient to climate and disaster risks        43.    44.   45.

                          School better prepared against disaster risks              46.    47.   48.

                          School is resilient to extreme climatic variations         49.    50.   51.

                          Protection from slide or soil erosion                      52.    53.   54.

                          Tree plantation for environment, dust and noise            55.    56.   57.
                          barrier
                          Improved school environment attracting both boys           58.    59.   60.
                          and girls
D. Environmental     What is the environment assessment category (Due                                           Indicate if an Environmental
assessment           Diligence Report or Initial environmental Examination)                                     due diligence is adequate or
category as per      as per Schedule 1 of Environment Protection Rule,                                          an IEE level assessment is
EPR of GON           1997 (amended 2007)?                                                                       required.

Required level of Environmental Assessment
(IEE or DDR)

Reason:

Screening done by/date:

Environment category approved by/date:
                                                                                                   25


                                     ATTACHMENT 2
                                SCHOOL SELECTION CRITERIA

1. 1st Phase: Evaluate all the district level school
   The Schools destroyed by wind, fire, landslides, earthquakes & other natural calamities
   which require new construction.
   The school whose classroom is borrowed by resource centre
   Community managed schools
   Schools running special programs
   Based on different educational indicators like enrollment of dalit students (X), enrollment of
   girl students (Y), ratio of grade 5 to grade 1 students (Z)
   Index = 0.4x + 0.3y + 0.3z
   The school with highest index will get the highest priority and low index as lowest priority.


2. 2nd Phase
                                        No of classroom in primary level
   Adequacy of classroom =
                                        Total no of classes running in primary level (including
                                        sections)


   If, ACR < 1, then construction of new classroom & furniture could be provided


                                        Area of all the classrooms in primary level (m2)
   Classroom Pressure =
                                        Total no of students in primary level


   If CP<0.75 m2, then construction of new classroom & furniture could be provided.


                                        Total no of students in primary level
   Student Density =
                                        Total no of classroom in primary level


   If SD>50:           In Kathmandu and Terai new classroom and furniture could be provided
   If SD>45:           New classroom and furniture could be provided in hilly region
   If SD>40:           New classroom and furniture could be provided in mountain region
26


                                     ATTACHMENT 3
                       POLICY OF DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
A.   DOE Policy for Improvement of School Physical Facilities (Classrooms, Toilet &
     WS)
           Decentralization (Construction through Community)
           o   Need Identification through community
           o   Program implementation through Community
           o   Ensuring ownership & thereby ensuring sustainability of the created facilities
           Collaboration with I/NGOs
           o   Harmonization
           o   Quality Supervision
           o   Involvement of Social Mobilization
           o   Better Transparency (Public Audit)
           o   Effective in awareness Raising
B.   DOE Policy on design & construction of school building
           Structural safety of buildings
           o   Design and construction as per National Building Code
           o   Safe against Earthquake and strong storms
           o   Construction supervision by qualified Engineers/Sub-Engineers.
           Child-friendly design & construction
           o   Classrooms (0.75 sqm per children, T:50, H:45, M:35 students per
               classroom)
           o   Furniture (Floor seating for grade 1 and 2)
           o   Water supply facilities
           o   Separate toilets for girls & boys
           Environment-friendly design & construction
           o   Enforcement of National Environmental Guidelines for School
               Improvement and Facility Management in Nepal
           Inclusive design & construction for disables
           o   Ramp construction for wheel chair movement
           o   One bigger door in every classroom & toilet for wheel chair movement
           Community contribution in facility development
           o   Creates ownership feeling
           o   Ensure sustainability of the created facilities
           o   Ensure regular repair & maintenance
                                                     ATTACHMENT 4
                                     OUTLINE OF ENVIRONMENTAL DUE DILIGENCE REPORT

1.    Introduction: (1 paragraph on the proposed works)
2.    Existing Environmental Setting (1 page): (a table of salient feature covering local environmental setting of school area which
      may include physical, vegetative, and social & cultural settings. Disaster risks and indications of potential impacts from climate
      change will be covered. A sketch showing environmental features of the school and its surroundings to be included)
3.    Areas of major concern and mitigation measure: (REA checklist (a format given in attachment 2) followed by a list of site-
      specific environmental impacts, if any, and the proposed mitigation measures for them. Please also refer to Table 1 and
      attachment 4- design guideline for school building construction from environmental perspective).
4.    Conclusion

              Format for preparing Environmental Management Plan
S.      Work Activity             Indicative Impacts               Proposed                Cost Estimate                  Schedule of    Implementing
No.                                 (refer table 4.1)              Mitigation        (and the Item Number in BOQ in     Implementation        and
                                                                                      which the cost is provisioned.)
                                                                   Measures                                                               Supervising
                                                                (refer table 4.1)                                                        Responsibility




                                                                                                                                                27
28


                                      ATTACHMENT 5
                OUTLINE OF INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) REPORT

          I.          Executive Summary
          II.         Project Description (with salient feature)
          III.        Description of Existing Environment in the Project Area
                            Physical environment
                            Biological environment
                            Socio-economic and cultural environment
          IV.         Potential Environmental Impacts and Mitigation Measures
                            Beneficial impacts and maximization measures
                            Adverse impacts and mitigation measures
          V.          Analysis of Alternatives
          VI.         Institutional Arrangements
          VII.        Environmental Monitoring and Management Plan (EMP)
          VIII.       Public Consultation and Disclosure Mechanism
          IX.         Grievance Redress Mechanism
          X.          Conclusion and Recommendations


     Annexes: (include approved TOR with approval letter; public notice certificate of deed
     (Muchulka);     format      of  survey     questionnaire,    recommendation       letter    from
     VDCs/municipalities; maps, photographs; detail of property acquisition with photo; list of
     trees to be cleared; list of community infrastructures to be affected by the project etc.).
                                                                                                                  29


                                      ATTACHMENT 6
                           ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING REPORT FORMAT

Monitoring will include:
  Implementation Status of mitigation measures as listed in the Environmental Management
  Plan (EMP). Please report if the EMP measures are complied / being complied / not
  complied. If not complied, give reasons and recommend corrective measures with
  implementing agency.
    Impact Monitoring: Impact monitoring will focus on key indicators of the impacts predicted in
    the EMP. Report on impacts occurred due to implementation of the project and mitigation
    measures adopted. Assess whether the identified impacts were accurate and the mitigation
    measure designed and implemented were sufficient / adequate / effective. Suggest
    corrective measures. The corrective measures will be monitored for its compliance and
    reevaluated next time again.

                                    Environmental Monitoring Format

Detail of Infrastructure:
District:                                                                                          Reporting
Date:
Reported by:
 SN           Activity    Potential             Mitigation Work      Current Status (with             Remarks
           (List activity  Impact                (as in EMP)        supporting data*) and
          form EMP of                                                Follow-up Required
          IEE report or
               DDR)




Note:    The monitoring format shall be attached to the monthly progress report.
         * Data could be nos. and % of female in work group; Nos. of training with nos. of participants (M/F); nos. of
trees removed and replanted etc.

         A safeguard monitoring report may include the following elements:
         - Background/context of the monitoring report (adequate information on the project,
            including physical progress of project activities, scope of monitoring report, reporting
            period);
         - Changes in project scope and adjusted safeguard measures, if applicable;
         - Qualitative and quantitative monitoring data;
         - Monitoring parameters/indicators and methods based on the monitoring
            plan/program previously agreed upon with concerned DPs;
         - Monitoring results compared against previously established benchmarks and
            compliance status (e.g., national environmental emission and ambient standards
            and/or standards set out in the WB‟s EHS guidelines; timeliness and adequacy of
            environmental mitigation measures; IR compensation rates and timeliness of
            payments, adequacy and timeliness of IR rehabilitation measures including serviced
            housing sites, house reconstruction, livelihood support measures, and training;
            budget for implementing EMP, RP, or IPP, timeliness and adequacy of capacity
            building, etc.);
30


     -   Monitoring results compared against the objectives of safeguards or desired
         outcomes documented (e.g. IR impacts avoided or minimized; livelihood restored or
         enhanced; IP‟s identity, human right, livelihood systems and cultural uniqueness fully
         respected; IP not suffer adverse impacts, environmental impacts avoided or minimized, etc.);
     -   If noncompliance or any major gaps identified, include a corrective action plan;
     -   Records on disclosure of monitoring information to affected communities;
     -   Identification of key issues, or complaints from affected people, or recommendations for
         improvement;
     -   Monitoring adjustment measures recommended based on monitoring experience/trends and
         stakeholders response;
     -   Information about actual institutional arrangement for implementing the monitoring
         program/plan provided or adjusted, as may be required;
     -   Proposed items of focus for the next report and due date.
                                                                                                                       31


                                  ATTACHMENT 7
               DESIGN GUIDELINE FROM SCHOOL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
                         FROM ENVIRONMENTAL PERSPECTIVE

1.      Background

The technical options for achieving a healthy environmental solution depends on different
variables. This section proposes the practically achievable options through the understanding of
different combinations of those variables.

A host of interrelated considerations- from site design to transportation issues factor into the
creation of a "high-performance" environmentally friendly school. To effectively integrate
environmentally friendly strategies, these options must be evaluated together from a whole
school building perspective early in the design process. To do this, school will required to form a
team of players from the community and school to work in collaboration with design team. The
school design team must have expertise in integrating safety, energy, and environmental
considerations into school design. Inputs from all stakeholders factor into good functional design
to ensure the environmentally friendly construction of school.

The following list provides basic information about some key elements to consider when
designing a high performance environmentally friendly school building. District education office
and Department of Education include these elements in their Request for Qualifications (RFQ)
or Request for Proposals (RFP) for design professionals. Once a design team is selected,
comprehensive design guidelines available through Department of Education can provide the
team with detailed information on the following strategies.

2.      Commitment and Motivation

The single most important factor in achieving environmentally friendly school is the presence of
committed and informed people.

The success of efforts in promoting environmentally friendly school relies on the awareness and
commitment of the community to want such a program and to ensure that it is maintained within
the community. The collective recognition and understanding of the problem by families and
community members can help to bring about support and action for efforts to influence
behaviors and conditions that will improve the environmental situation in school.

 Community commitment is strengthened/marked by
    Acknowledgement of the importance of the problem from education, environment and other groups
    Allocating local resources, e.g. public money for incorporating environmentally friendly products in schools
    Combining the program with other programs in the community, such as primary health care and sanitary environment
    Ongoing efforts to attract media attention
    Involving existing councils, school committee, organizations such as women's group, NGO, Eco clubs etc
    Use of both problem solving as well as environment promoting approaches to improve school environment


2.1     Supportive school policies/practices: Development of supportive school policies and
practices related to environmental improvement is to make a program sustainable. For example;
regulations for improving and maintaining adequate sanitary facilities and a safe water supply at
the school are essential. Also, collaboration and coordination between the education and
32


environment sectors and between the school and the community are important requirements for
success.

                                         Examples of supportive policies and regulations
         Required periodic coordination between environment and education authorities at local, district, and national levels
         Rules about cleanliness for students and personnel, and about the proper use of latrines and water supply facilities
         Rules about keeping the school environment clean



                                              Examples of supportive practices in schools
         School curriculum includes environment/environment preservation
         Proper use of hygienic toilets/latrines
         Regular cleaning of toilets/latrines
         Existence and use of proper hand washing facilities
         Safe food and water
         Formation of eco clubs, environmental awareness campaigns in schools
         Teacher's training on environment related subjects
         School/community projects and outreach


3.     School Building Location

3.1     Orientation: School building orientation is very important as it determines magnitude,
natural heating, and lighting available inside the building. Orientations are based on the climate
type of the place where school facilities are planned. In Nepal three geo-zones are available viz:
Terai, Mountain, and Hill. The orientation of school building in each of the above type is
described below.

 Terai Region
 Arrange the school buildings in such a
 way that the prevailing winds can be used
 in cooling rooms.

 The school buildings should be oriented
 facing between West to North. In case,
 the building can‟t be avoided facing East,
 West or South, evergreen trees have to
 be planted to prevent direct sunlight
 entering the building.
                                                                                                   33


 Orientation criteria sometimes are
 influenced by the change in the school
 timing. For instance, during the summer
 in some parts of the Terai, there is a
 practice of conducting the classes early in
 the morning (6.30 hrs to 10.30 hrs with no
 break); in such cases, facing North or
 North-East causes direct glare in the
 class rooms; other side of the coin is that
 in such a case and when the site does
 not permit the ideal orientation,
 orientating the classrooms towards West-
 West-South supported by other measures
 may be permitted.


 Mountain Region
 In the mountain region, making use of
 sun to heat the rooms is a good design
 concept. Therefore, building orientation
 should be between East and West. One-
 way to block the seeping winter wind is to
 plant trees in the direction of the
 prevailing wind.

 Hill Area
 It is advisable to provide deciduous trees
 and at the same time allow winter sun to
 heat up the buildings.


Understanding the location and the surroundings including the contour is very important for
developing the Master Plan. A building that looks good and fits well at one site may not
necessarily look good at another site. Poor site selection for school buildings can lead to high
costs on account of earth retaining structures. A careful study of the terrain can easily help to
reduce this as shown in the illustration and table. For any given location, a site that results in the
minimum cut height “h” should be selected.

3.2    Site Selection and Planning: Both, site selection and site planning have a major input
on the relative "greening" of any school facility being planned. Site selection for school includes
such issues as transportation and travel distances for students, impacts on wildlife corridors,
and impact on the hydrology. Decisions that school make during the site planning will impact the
immediate natural community as well as the school building, energy consumption and student
comfort. Good site planning minimizes site clearing; preservation of existing vegetation may
provide a low maintenance. Mature stands of native vegetation in school compound often
provide the desired energy conserving shade and wind control that would otherwise required
years to develop for expensive new plantings. Thoughtful placement of a school building on a
site promotes energy conservation by taking advantage of natural site features such as
topography, sunlight, shade and breezes.
34


While selecting the site or laying the school building, it is very important to note of features like
religious objects, protected forests, river, stream, landslides etc. within and around the site.
These are additional factors that need attention apart from other factors.

School building should protect its occupants from rain, wind, sun and snow, and seismic risks.
Schools should be designed to prevent extremes of temperatures inside classrooms. Standard
design for schools in mountain, hill and Terai will be different due to different climatic conditions.

3.3       Approximation for earth cutting and retaining wall

Schools in mountain and hill region of Nepal fall on slopes. Poor site selection for school
buildings can lead high cost on account of earth retaining structures. A careful study of terrain
can easily help to reduce this as illustrated in the table. For any given location, a site that results
in the minimum cut height “h” should be selected.

                                                           Small Multipurpose               Large
                                                                  hall                Multipurpose hall


                                              Angle        B      H       SL      B       H        SL

                                              5            19.7   1.72    19.78   24.3    2.13     24.39

                                              10           19.7   3.47    19.97   24.3    4.28     24.63

                                              15           19.7   5.26    20.32   24.3    6.49     25.07

                                              20           19.7   7.17    20.97   24.3    8.85     25.86

                                              25           19.7   9.18    21.72   24.3    11.32    26.79
      Large multipurpose hall
                                              30           19.7   11.37   22.73   24.3    14.02    28.04


 B           H       SL
 24.3        2.13    24.39
 24.3        4.28    24.63
                                                               Academic buildings
 24.3        6.49    25.07
 24.3        8.85    25.86                         Angle       B       H        SL
 24.3        11.32   26.79                          5          11.7    1.02     11.74
 24.3        14.02   28.04                         10          11.7    2.06     11.86
                                                   15          11.7    3.12     12.07
                                                   20          11.7    4.26     12.45
                                                   25          11.7    5.45     12.90
                                                   30          11.7    6.75     13.50


This table will help to guide during the site selection and site development.

The following illustrations show some of the real site situations. The site engineers can refer to
these illustrations to find optimal solutions, which the master plan may not show.
                                                                      35


                                  Site situations and earth cutting
                          0
Here the ground is at 5 slopes and it is cut to fit the
building. As such, no retaining wall is required if the cut
surface is riveted with vegetation.




In this case, the building is placed with minimum
disturbance to the ground. This is possible if the slope of
                          0
the ground is less than 5 . However, some filling may be
required to bring the rooms in one level.




            0        0
Between 10 and 15 slopes, massive retaining wall is not
necessary. Study the topography of the site and go for
low height retaining or gabion wall. If the ground is not
loose or marshy, the heights of these walls can be of half
the cut height. The upper half height can be manipulated
as per the table given depending on the angle of repose.
If a gabion wall is built, cover the top of the walls with
good soil and plant greenery for beautification.



                          0   0
For a grade between 15 -20 , the height of the retaining
                                rd
wall can be approximately 2/3 of the cut. However, as
                                     0
the ground becomes steeper to 20 , this rule-of-thumb
may not be applicable. In this case, follow the illustration
given below.




In such a situation, a split retention wall is used. When
this type of wall is built, it should be ensured that the
active resultant force of the upper retaining wall falls on
middle third of the lower wall foundation.




Here, the left half of the building falls on a steep slope as
compared to right hand side half. In such a situation, one
option can be the use of combined single and split
retention wall or adopt the cut and fill method on the left
portion, and only cut method on the right. However,
before making the decisions, economic advantages have
to be considered.
36


Both site selection and site planning have a major input on the relative "greening" of any school
facility being planned. Site selection for school includes such issues as transportation and travel
distances for students, impacts on wildlife corridors, and impact on the hydrology. Decisions that
school make during the site planning will impact the immediate natural community as well as the
school building, energy consumption and student comfort. Good site planning minimizes site
clearing; preservation of existing vegetation may provide a low maintenance landscape and
avoids supplemental irrigation. Mature stands of native vegetation in school compound often
provide the desired energy conserving shade and wind control that would otherwise required
years to develop for expensive new plantings. Thoughtful placement of a school building on a
site promotes energy conservation by taking advantage of natural site features such as
topography, sunlight, shade and breezes.

While selecting the site or laying the school building, it is very important to note of features like
religious objects, protected forests, river, stream, landslides etc. within and around the site.
These are additional factors that need attention apart from other factors.
4.     Day Lighting and Windows
Poor indoor lighting in classroom can have many harmful effects on health and well being of
teachers and students. A poorly lit classroom can lead to eyesight problems. Poor lighting within
the classroom can also make students feel more depressed. Generally, these problems can be
remediated by adding windows to the classroom to increase the amount of natural light,
however because of different climatic condition of Nepal, window selection should be based
where facility is planned. Increasing natural light is also important for classroom cleanliness; if a
classroom is dark, it is more difficult to see dust and dirt and thus more difficult to clean
properly.
Increased use of daylight helps to reduce electric lighting usage, and avoiding the heat
generated by lighting fixtures. High performance windows with low e-glazing also help to
minimize heat gain in warmer months and heat loss in colder.
It was noted that in Terai of Nepal, people try to increase ventilation, which may result in a
teacher standing against the glare from an open window. In mountain, because of cold, the
tendency is to build small window resulting in dark classrooms.
An alternative to large windows is the perforated screen wall. This is a solid masonry wall
punctured by numerous closely spaced holes through which light can filter. If the wall is built of
bricks the perforation effect can be achieved by simply leaving spaces between the bricks at
regular intervals. If it is made of concrete (or earth-cement) blocks, special moulds can be used
to produce blocks with decorative holes. Where masonry is not used for construction, or where
there do exist large window openings, other kinds of screens can be created, for example using
horizontal bamboos.




A perforated window is an alternative to a window             A louvered window could provide
opening in warm climates. It provides security and            glare-free light at the front of
relatively even distribution of light.                        classroom
                                                                                                  37


The advantages of perforated screen wall are that it provides security and a relatively even
distribution of light. The disadvantages are that it does not protect against wind, cold and dust,
and classroom (particularly if large) can remain rather dark unless the internal walls are also
light colored. Care must be taken to orient the building so that direct sunlight does not penetrate
the screen wall, since this will almost certainly lead to glare.

In mountains, where small windows are necessary to reduce heat loss, it makes sense to
maximize the light which light that can enter through a small opening. A roof light lets in
considerably more light than a window of equal size in a wall. A provision of sky light in CGI roof
is found in schools in mountain. This arrangement helps to bring more light into the center of the
classroom, which is often poorly served by wall windows. However, care has to be taken to
avoid direct sunlight falling onto desks.

It is also important to make the best use of any light once it has entered the room. Untreated
mud-and dung plaster on the walls, for instance will make a room relatively dark. The underside
of a thatched roof will absorb lot of light. The level of light can be dramatically increased with a
light colored ceiling and lime wash on the walls. These can also reduce glare by ensuring that
light is reflected from all directions. In addition, adoption of matt-finished blackboard and regular
repainting it can be relatively cheap way of mitigating the impact of poor lighting.

5.     Renewable Energy Systems

Use of solar and wind technologies with battery storage can provide emergency power supply,
or a source of steady power. Renewable energy system in school can increase maintenance
requirements, but they also reduce utility costs. Some schools located in hills of Nepal have no
electricity. So for the lighting and other purposes like operation of basic science equipment,
computer, it is necessary to find alternative means of electricity. Renewable energy could
become an important element for meeting school energy demand.

In mountains of Nepal, majority of children don‟t take shower because of unavailability of hot
water. Even school with necessary infrastructure and other facilities lacks this facility.
Introducing solar technologies for water heating purposes could solve this problem.

6.     Ventilation Systems

Adequate school ventilation is important. The poor ventilation in schools can lead to respiratory
problems, and easily transmit tuberculosis and other infectious diseases. Constructing schools
with a sufficient number of windows may improve ventilation. Alternatively, schools can be
constructed using bricks with holes drilled through them ("air-bricks"), which allow fresh air to
circulate within the classroom.

Using the whole-building approach, school designers can factor in energy saving choices that
reduce heating and cooling loads.

7.     School Sanitation

The high incidence of disease, particularly among children is largely attributed to unsafe
drinking water, poor personal hygiene practices and unsanitary environment. Each and every
school should have adequate safe water supply system and sanitation facility. But majority of
rural schools in Nepal neither have proper water supply nor sanitation system, particularly
toilets.
38


7.1 General Criteria for Hygienic Facilities and Safe Water Supply in School: There are
many methods that can be used to provide hygienic sanitation facilities and a safe water supply
at school. The principles and criteria involved in the selection of appropriate methods stipulate
that those chosen should be:

         Technically and environmentally sound
         Financially affordable
         Socially and culturally acceptable
         Reliant on labor and resources available in the community
         Simple to install, operate and maintain
         Easily accessible by the students
         Related to reducing public health problems that are perceived as priorities within the
         community

8.     Drinking Water

A "safe water supply" is a source of water that is not contaminated by dirt, bacteria, parasites, or
anything else that could cause contamination.

To promote school health an easily accessible water supply should be available that provides
sufficient safe water to meet school needs. School water needs, can be estimated by
questioning stakeholders of school about their daily water use. If this is not possible, minimum
water need should be calculated. To ensure that the water is potable, either the water supply
should be protected or the water should be treated before use. Often, unprotected water
sources such as springs, traditional wells and ponds, can be improved and this may be
preferable to constructing new supplies. However, unprotected sources are open to
contamination and pose a potential health risk. School environmental health program should
therefore promote the use of protected drinking water source.

Some countries have set minimum standards for the supply of safe drinking water to pupils. For
instance, in Viet Nam, every school is supposed to provide 0.33 liters of boiled water per pupil
per day in summer and 0.1 liters in winter.

Characteristics of low-risk water sources
   The water source is fully enclosed or protected (capped) and no surface water can run
   directly into it.
   People do not step into the water while collecting it.
   Latrines are located as far away as possible (minimum 15 meters away) from the water
   source and preferably not on higher ground. If there are community concerns about this, expert
   advice should be sought.
   Solid waste pits, animal excreta and other pollution sources are located as far as possible
   from the water source.
   There is no stagnant water within 5 meters of the water source.
   If wells are used, the collection buckets are kept clean and off the ground or a hand pump is used.
                                                                                                     39


Checklist for schools considering water supply improvements

      Have stakeholders of school been fully consulted about the type of water supply?
      Have stakeholders of school had previous experiences with water supply improvements and have
      these been relayed to the relevant agency?
      How will the water supply be managed to ensure that it is reasonably accessible to everyone in the
      school?
      What are the long-term financial implications of the choice of water supply?
      Can the school afford to pay expected operation and maintenance cost?
      What spare parts are required and how often should they be replaces?
      Who will be trained to operate and maintain the water supply?
      Will the quality of the water be tested?

Among the many types of water sources schools in Nepal are found using the sources like
protected springs, dug wells, boreholes, and piped water supply.

8.1       The Available Types of Water Sources in Nepalese Schools

8.1.1 Protected Springs: A spring is where underground water flows to the surface. Springs
may occur when the water table meets the ground surface, these are called gravity springs. In
some cases, ground water is held under pressure and a spring comes to the surface because of
a natural break in the rock, or because a shallow excavation is made. Springs can make very
good water supplies provided they are properly protected against contamination. If springs are
found above the school, they can feed a pipe system for providing water close to school. When
a spring is at the same or lower level than the school, it can still be protected, but greater care is
needed and it is unlikely that water will flow through the pipe system by gravity. The first step in
deciding whether a spring should be protected is to determine whether it provides enough water
for expected number of students. It can easily be done by measuring the time it takes for the
spring to fill a bucket of known volume.

8.1.2 Dug wells: Dug wells are usually shallow wells dug by hand, although some may be
quite deep, and they are often lined with bricks. However, unless artesian water is tapped, many
dug wells go dry or have very little water in dry periods because it is difficult to sink wells below
the water table without using more sophisticated techniques.

8.1.3 Boreholes: Boreholes are narrow holes drilled into the ground that tap into groundwater.
Generally as the borehole is drilled, a lining of plastic, steel or iron is sunk to protect the hole
from collapsing. The lining has slots in the bottom section to allow entry into the borehole and
gravel is placed around the bottom of the lining to improve flow and provide filtration. The top
few meters around the borehole should be sealed using concrete, and a concrete apron is cast
around the top of the borehole to prevent surface water from flowing into the lined shaft. A stand
is usually cast into the apron to provide a stable base for the pump. Once the borehole is
completed it should be cleaned with chlorine and the pump installed. Majority of the schools in
the hill and Terai of Nepal use boreholes with hand-pumps. Boreholes usually provide good
quality water, but the water sometimes contains harmful chemicals, such as fluoride and
arsenic, or nuisance chemicals such as iron, etc. The school should carry out chemical analysis
of water in a regular interval as discussed under the monitoring protocol of this guideline.

8.1.4 Piped water supply: Many schools in Nepal have piped water systems. These piped
water systems are often small and rely on community management. Most piped water supplies
include storage tanks so that water is always available, even when demand is heaviest. Such
40


tanks are usually necessary because the rate of water use at peak times of the day in school is
greater than the average rate of use throughout the day. The tanks also provide emergency
storage in the event of a breakdown. Piped system in a school requires regular maintenance.
Pipe leaks likely to be used heavily by student. As a result, the taps are more likely to break and
will need frequent replacement. One-way of dealing with these issues is to give someone in the
school responsibility for school taps and making repairs. To prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water around school taps, school could build a concrete “apron” at the base of taps
and include a drain and soakage pit.

Another problem with piped systems is that students do not consider the impact of how much
water they use, and may not think it is important to turn off the tap after use. When there is a lot
of water, this may not have negative consequences. However, where the amount of water
available is limited, there will be shortage of water. Schools with piped water systems should
thus be aware of these impacts of their water use and good water use should be promoted.

8.2    Rainwater harvesting scheme in schools

Although rainwater can be a good source of water for drinking and other purposes in school, it
may be seasonal, and it is often difficult for a school to rely on rainwater alone. This technology
could be used in conjunction with other available sources of water. Schools for their own use
could collect rainwater. If the rainwater is to be used for drinking purpose it is better to collect it
from a roof, rather than from ground catchments where it may become contaminated. Ground
catchments are more appropriate for use in garden and watering of grounds.

Using roofs to collect rainwater is relatively easy and a lot of water can be collected. For
example; 50 mm of rainfall on a 4-m2 roof yields 200 liters of water. All that is required are
gutters around the roof that discharge into a collection tank. The roofing material is important
and hard surfaces, such as iron sheets or tiles. Hard surfaces are also easier to keep clean and
are less likely to have insects and animals living in them.

Any roof used to collect rainwater for human consumption must be thoroughly cleaned at the
start of the rainy period. Birds and animals may leave faeces on the roof and these can be a
source of pathogens. There should be a system for diverting the flow of water in gutters away
from the tank, so that the first rain (which are more likely to pick up contamination from the roof)
are not collected. A small filter may be added to the top of the collection tank as an added
protection. The tank should also be cleaned every year and any silt or algal matter removed.
After cleaning and before use, the tank should be scrubbed using a chlorine solution (bleach).

Water should be drawn from a tap at the base of the tank, rather than with a bucket, which may
contaminate the water. It is better not to bury the collection tank, even partially, since
contaminated water from the soil can enter the tank. Covering the tank is also essential for
preventing contamination of the water and for reducing opportunities for disease vectors to
breed.

8.3    School Water Treatment and Safe Handling of Water

The best option for improving the school water quality is to treat water in the school by filtering,
chlorinating, boiling or leaving the water to settle. Individual school could select the options as
appropriate. These options are discussed in more detail in following sections.
                                                                                                  41


8.3.1 Boiling: Bringing water to a rolling boil (20 minutes) will destroy pathogens in the water
and make it safe to drink.

8.3.2 Candle filters: Candle filters are hollow, porous ceramic cartridges, commonly found
used in schools of Nepal. Although they do not filter out all pathogens, they remove the larger
ones such as protozoa, worms, and bacteria (but not viruses). Ceramic candles need careful
maintenance and should be cleaned and boiled at least once a week, even if they are not
clogged. If a candle filter becomes clogged, it should be scrubbed under running water with a
stiff brush free of soap. To reduce the risk that water will pass through a candle without being
filtered, such as through small crack, candle filters should be regularly inspected and replaced if
necessary.

8.3.3 Chlorination: This will kill most bacteria and some viruses. Since that taste of chlorine
disappears when water is left in open containers, very small lump of bleaching powder can be
added to a 20-liter water container and the mix left to stand for at least 30 minutes. After this
time, if a faint smell of chlorine can be detected in the water, it should be low –risk and palatable
to drink. Chlorine should only be added to clear water otherwise the dirt in the water would
absorb it. Other disinfections systems have been developed for treating water, particularly
through the use of solar radiation. This technology is commonly known as “SODIS” in Nepal.
This is effective in treating water, although this may take longer than chlorine disinfections.

Frequently water collected from a communal point and transported back to school for use
becomes contaminated because of poor handling. Stakeholders of school should therefore be
aware of the risks of contaminating the water and how it can be prevented.

8.4    Water Conservation

Although it is important that students use enough water for good hygiene, in areas where water
is scarce it is also important not to waste water. As mentioned above, piped water supplies are
particularly vulnerable to wastage, if they are not properly managed, the surrounding community
of school may suffer water shortages. Most piped water systems leak and need to be checked
regularly and repaired as soon as faults are discovered. Taps should be turned off immediately
after use and students discouraged from playing with taps.

8.5    Sanitation Facilities

Safe disposal of excreta, so that it doesn't contaminate the environment, water, food, or hands
is essential for ensuring a healthy school environment and for protecting personal health. This
can be accomplished in many ways, some requiring water, others requiring little or none.
Regardless of method, the safe disposal of human faeces in school is one of the principal ways
of breaking the faecal-oral disease transmission cycle. Sanitation is therefore a critical barrier to
disease transmission.

One reason why latrines are often out of order in Nepalese schools is that they are frequently
inappropriately designed for use by children to use. Latrines in Nepalese schools vary in design
from communal three to six hole latrines served in schools in Sindhupalchowk, to simple pit
latrines. The number of latrines available/observed in schools during the field visit was without
exception insufficient to meet the needs of students, particularly at time of peak usage such as
break. The situation contrasts with the standards generally accepted within the health,
environment and education sectors, which are shown in box discussed below.
42


The provision of one latrine for approximately thirty pupils is generally recommended, if urinals are
also available. This represents one latrine for every twenty girls and one for every forty boys.

When planning the number of latrines for a school, certain issues should be considered:
  Are separate urinals available for boys? If so, fewer latrines will be needed.
  What is the proportion of boys to girls? If urinals are available, boys need fewer latrines.
  Are children allowed to leave the classroom during classes to use the latrine? If not, the pressure
  on latrines at break/recreational time will increase and more latrines will be required.
  Do all children have breaks from classes at the same time? If so more latrines will be
  required. Could breaks be staggered?

8.6    Drainage

The planning and implementation of proper drainage system is very important. The following
guidelines must be considered for drainage designing and in its construction.
    The design should be as simple s possible considering for future development
    Generally, if the drains are not wider than 150X 150 mm, it can be left open but any drain
    bigger than 150 mm should be covered.
    Drains carrying off surface water can be open or covered
    In both the cases, silt traps at appropriate distances should be provided. However, if there is
    sudden level difference created by walls or land profiles, two silt traps may be required
    General rule of thumb is to provide silt traps at every 20 meters intervals for easy cleaning.
    All drainage should be self-cleaning and should function at minimum running maintenance
    costs.
    The main collection drain should always be covered or laid underground.
    Normal roof drains are 150X100 mm at 5% slope. The slope and depth will increase as the
    roof drain reaches the outlet of the collecting drain.
    Minimum size recommended for the collecting drain is 300 X250 mm and should be covered
    with concrete slab with perforation to take in surface runoff waters
    The depth of the collecting drain will depend on the locality and distance from the sub-
    drains, such as roof drain, retaining wall drains, etc.
    While collecting and discharging surface waters, it should not cause public nuisance or pose
    danger to health and property.
    Beside the roof drains, it is an advantage and desirous to construct surface water drains
    around the school buildings, playgrounds, open spaces etc to prevent flooding during the
    monsoon.
    It is not advisable to seal off the manhole and inspection chamber with concrete completely
    if intermediate ventilation is not provided. This will cause cracks of pipes, disintegration of
    joints etc
    Any drain provided around or within the courtyard must be concealed.
                                                                                                  43


                                             8.7   Technologies for Excreta Disposal in
                                             School

                                             The off-set latrine system is economic, easy in
                                             design, could be constructed with local available
                                             materials and easy to build and maintain for schools.
                                             The choice of technology to be adopted for toilet
                                             purely depends on the water availability, budget, soil
                                             type etc. This particular type is found very useful to
                                             recommend as standard design in Nepal.
                                             This latrine do not require periodic emptying, once a
                                             pit is full it is sealed and a new pit is dug. The fecal
                                             matter is left to decompose in dry conditions for at
                                             least two years, the contents can be safely and the
pit reused. These latrines could also be designed to allow fecal matter to compost and be
reused in agriculture. Other designs that could be incorporated are two alternating pits, reducing
the need for new pits. As shown in design, ventilation is installed to remove odor and flies, basic
and locally available materials could be used. Mostly the toilets constructed in Nepal were
problem of chocking; students throw carelessly all the solid waste (paper, plastics etc) in toilet
resulting in blocking the trap. As per the standard, the number of toilet required for each school
will be calculated, and the toilet is proposed in series as shown above. The urinals could be built
to reduce the number of toilets required emptied manually.

One main reason for poor maintenance of the school toilets was due to separate toilets for staff
and student usages. These arrangements create less emphasis and inadequate monitoring of
student's toilet. This was observed even in one of those schools where there was plenty of
water available for maintaining the toilet. It is suggested that in order to improve the sanitary
condition of toilet and to gain students confidence towards cleanliness, all the stakeholders of
school should share toilets.

For a school latrine to function properly it must be maintained and cleaned on a daily basis.
Somebody must have specific responsibility for this and compliance must be checked. Groups
of school children might do the cleaning in rotation.
44


                               ATTACHMENT 8
            LABORATORY CHECKLIST FROM ENVIRONMENTAL PERSPECTIVE

 S. No.                        Screening Question                          Yes   No   Remarks
     1.   Will the research academic work be laboratory based? [ If
          the answer of question 1 is No, then go to question 4]
     2.   Does the laboratory have
            i    environment,      health   and   safety   protocol   or
                 guidelines?
           ii    adequate fire safety provision?
           iii   safety provision for gas cylinder handling?
           iv    proper waste disposal facilities?
           v     adequate liquid waste management facilities?
           vi    proper storage facilities for hazardous chemicals,
                 pesticides etc?
          vii    adequate ventilation system?
          viii   first-aid facilities?
           ix    emergency exit facilities?
           x     trained     professional     to      guide    the
                 researchers/students about safety procedures?
     3.   Will the laboratory based research work
            i    produce hazardous waste materials?
           ii    generate infectious waste?
           iii   cause significant emissions of gas harmful to ions
                 of gas harmful to health?
           iv    generate liquid waste?
           v     cause any major noise?
     4.   Will the research work require interventions at field level?
     5.   Will the field based research work
            i    located at or near an environmentally sensitive
                 area?
           ii    discharge any liquid waste in the environment?
           iii   discharge large quantities of waste/used water?
           iv    generate hazardous waste?
           v     Impair downstream water quality?
           vi    have any possible degradation in land and
                 ecosystem?
          vii    cause local air pollution from any plants/system
                 operation?
                                                                                          45


S. No.                     Screening Question                        Yes   No   Remarks
         viii   generate excessive noise and/or dust?
  6.     Will medical, biophysical or clinical      research   be
         conducted using human subjects?
  7.     Will the project have any indirect impact on environment
         and ecosystem?
  8.     Will the research work involve permission or clearance of
         any government department or agency?
  9.     Will future expansion or implementation of research
         finding cause any major environment problem?
46


                            ATTACHMENT 9
 FACTORS TO UNDERSTAND EXISTING SANITATION AND WATER SUPPLY CONDITION


Sanitation Facilities:
       What is the type of existing latrines? (are these single pit/ double pits/ twin pit latrine of
       attached with a septic tank?)
       What is the number of the available latrines and urinals?
       Are constructions/maintenance of the latrines OK? (are the doors, plaster, roof etc. in
       good condition?)
       Are the latrines working well? (are pits/ twin pits/ septic tanks/soak away working
       properly?)
       Are the latrines clean or are the dirty and smelly?
       Can the latrines be locked from inside?
       Do these latrines have privacy in terms of proper doors and location?
       Are the latrines kept under lock and key during school time?
       Is there a hand washing facility (soap, ash etc.) available?
       Are urinals available for the boys?
       Are the urinals smelly?
       Do the girls students stay at home because of having no proper latrines or because they
       have to share with boys?
       Do the latrines need any special maintenance?
       Is the number of latrines available sufficient for the number of students / teachers in
       each shift we have in the school? etc.
       Other observations

Water Supply Facilities:
      Are water supply facilities available in the premises?
      Is there enough water available for washing hands, cleansing, flushing and cleaning of
      the latrines?
      How is the physical condition of the water supply facilities? Is water source drying up?
      What is the distance between water supply facility and latrines?
      Are different sources of water used for sanitation and drinking purposes?
      Is the environment of water supply facility clean and does a soak away exist?
      Are there any reported events of sickness or contamination by drinking the existing
      water source?
      Other observations
